Title: The Spirit catches you and you fall down
Author: Fadiman Anne.
Date of Publication: 1998

The main characters in this book are listed below:

1) Lia, the baby who had seizures and was the main focus of the book.
2) Foua and Nad Kao, the Hmong mother and father of Lia, respectively.
3) Peggy and Neil, the married doctors that worked at the hospital in Northern California where Lia went for most of her treatments.
4) Jeanine Hilt, the social worker who works on Lia’s case and advocates for her and the Lee family.
5) Anne Fadiman, the author of the book.  She is a character in the book, as she writes firsthand about her experiences doing research on Hmong culture and her interactions with the Lee family.

The key events in the book are as follows.  The Lee family escapes fighting in Vietnam and ends up in a Hmong refugee camp.  After living there for some time, the family boards a plane and flies to the United States to live as legal immigrants.  They end up in Merced in Northern California.  After arriving in the United States, the mother Foua has a baby and names it Lia.  Lia starts having frequent seizures and the Lee family brings her to the hospital in Merced for treatments.

The Lee family speaks no English, which makes it very hard to administer care and communicate with the American Doctors.  Their cultural differences and views on medicine make it impossible for them to understand why the doctors are choosing their treatments and prescriptions.

The Lee’s don’t give their medicine as directed by the doctors, so Neil files a complaint with the state and gets child protective services to take Lia from her family.  Lia goes to another family for about a year and a half and is then returned to the Lee family.  Lia then has a grand mal seizure and looses brain activity and is declared to be in a vegetative state.

Instead of putting Lia in a facility for brain dead people or letting her off life support to die peacefully, the Lee family takes her home and keeps her alive for years.  They don’t understand there is no chance of her getting better.  They continue to practice alternative medicine on her in hopes of her getting better.

The author’s connection to the topic is that she is an anthropologist studying Hmong refugees transition to the American medical system.  She is qualified to write this book because she did investigative independent field work for years interviewing Hmong refugees and reading every book available on Hmong culture. She also worked with Lia’s social worker and Lia’s family directly to gain access to all of Lia’s medical records.  In addition, she interviewed Lia’s doctors and followed the Lee family for years all thru Lia’s seizures and treatments.  She also interviewed the foster family that took care of Lia.

Many social determents of health are discussed specifically in the book.  Specifically Hmong and American social determents of health are compared and contrasted to show the stark differences between the cultural values.  The concept of spirituality and spiritual well-being is the main social determent of health discussed in the book.  I am identifying this specifically because spirituality is the central theme of the book and also the central focus of Hmong culture and Hmong life.  All Hmong social events are centered around spiritual ceremonies.  In addition, all of Hmong medicine incorporates spiritual connection and ritual.

For example, the Hmong do not have doctors, they have shamans called tvix neebs that are called upon to perform rituals and ceremonies for the ill.  This practice is used because Hmong people believe all illness is caused by the soul’s un-rest.  All Hmong medicine is practiced around this core belief that the soul has left the sick person’s body and needs to be returned somehow.  Therefore, the Hmong social determent of health is measured by a person’s grasp on their own soul.  In contrast, the American social determent of health is measured by measurements like vitals, blood pressure, temperature, etc.  In addition to this, Hmong people believe that seizures are a sign of somebody who is communicating with higher powers and spirits, and may also be a sign that the person is called upon to become a spiritual healer (tvix-neeb, or shaman).

It is clear after reading this book that American social determents of health and Hmong social determents of health are completely different.  Another example of a difference between American and Hmong views on social determents of health is in regards to one’s individual economic stability.  In the American view of economic stability, one is seen as successful if one has material possessions such as a house, a car, lots of different clothes, a bed frame, a nice mattress, an air conditioner, a variety of foods to eat, and other such creature comforts and material items.

In Hmong culture, the clan you are in shares everything and helps each family with necessities such as rice and building a house. Therefore, economic stability is seen as merely being an honorable member of your clan.  As long as one maintains the status of being an honorable member of one’s clan, one can expect to have what is viewed as economic stability.  An economically stable person in Hmong culture is viewed as a person who has enough rice to eat for the day and a simple house with a dirt floor and bamboo walls.  This would be considered extreme poverty and deprivation in American culture.

I am calling out the social determent of economic stability because it is a central value in the American capitalistic system.  Economic status and level of income are directly measured as indicators of a person’s worth, marriage eligibility, and level of intelligence in the American system of thinking.  Rich people are seen as healthy, smart, and interesting.  Poor people are seen as ignorant, unhealthy and not worthy of romantic involvement.

There are many specific ethical issues addressed in the book.  For example the ethical issue of following a doctor’s orders is discussed frequently in the text.  In American culture people show respect to doctors orders and it is seen as the patient’s fault if they remain sick after disobeying a doctor’s order.  In Hmong culture, people are taught to view all medical advice as a suggestion and ultimately follow their own spiritual intuition on how to best fight a ailment.  This is why the Lee family did not follow the doctor’s orders in regards to the specific medicine dosage to follow for Lia.  The doctors then view it as completely the Lee’s fault when their child continues to have seizures.

This book has many implications for the nursing an health care practice.  One implication is that it is very clear proper interpreter staffing should be present at all hospitals 24 hours per day.  Many of the Lee’s issues could have been avoided with a good interpreter on staff 24/7.

Another implication for the nursing practice is that more attention should be paid to how other cultures view medicine.  Proof of this implication is described in the prologue of this book, where the author describes that now the Merced hospital has a list of approved shaman rituals that may be performed in the hospital.  This is an example of cultural sensitivity towards the Hmong people.  The implied implication here is that nurses who serve specific cultural populations should be educated on what to expect when people with extremely different views on medicine come to the hospital to receive care.









